Hello everyone and welcome to the lecture
on the range function.
So in this short lecture we'll be discussing
the range function.
And we haven't developed a very deep level of knowledge
on functions yet but we can understand the basics
of this pretty simple function, range.
It's gonna be extremely useful and you'll see a lot
throughout the code
so here I have the Jupyter notebook open.
This is what we're gonna be going over
and what's interesting is there's gonna be
a pretty interesting Python 3 alert that happens
and we'll be exploring what that means later on.
So let's go ahead and just get started.
Right now I'm working in Python 2
and we're gonna use range so
what the range function allows you to do;
it allows you to create a list of numbers ranging
from a starting point up to an ending point
and then you can also specify step size
so if I just write range and then click Shift+Tab,
since I'm working in Python,
it's gonna go ahead give you the Docstring here
so you can say range give a list of integers.
range
so this is basically what we're gonna be going over.
So I have the range function
and I can give it a starting point
and a stopping point so let's go ahead and run that
and then it outputs a list of integers from
that stop or that start, excuse me.
Up to that stop but no including it.
So if you've noticed, I have from 0 all the way up to 9
and you can kind of think that this relates
with zero-indexing.
A lot of times this is confusing for beginners.
They expect to have a 10 in the output list
but remember, it's up to not including.
Okay, so moving along, another thing you can do
is just specify
for the 0 there by default.
I could also just put 10 or let's say 11
and you can kind of think of this as;
if you put in range for just a singular number,
it's gonna give you from 0 up to but not including
that number.
Okay and just to drive the point home;
that we're outputting a list,
I'm gonna say, a variable x
is equal to your range
from 0 up to 10
and then if I output x, it's gonna be a list.
And another function we can use to check the type
of object that is, is the type function.
For the type function, you just put in
type and in parentheses you enter the object
and it outputs the type so we get a list out.
And let's go ahead and just explore this a little further
and let's say my start can be, let's say, the number five.
My stop will be the number 20
and I'm gonna say give me a range from start
to stop
and you'll notice I start at that number five and output it
and I go up to but not including my stop number.
Okay, so we notice how we went up to 20
but not actually produce 20
so it goes up to but not including just like in indexing.
Something we're gonna explore now is step size
so we can specify that as a third argument
so I'm gonna go ahead and change my start to 0
so I get the numbers 0 through 19
and then as a third argument here in my range function,
I can specify a step size.
So here, if I enter the third number to be two,
I'll go in steps of two; so basically all the even numbers
up to but not including 20.
So this is a useful tool later on your code
when you want to produce lists of a certain range
or at a certain step size.
Range is going to really allow you to do that very quickly.
Okay, so that's not it,
we'll have a Python 3 alert.
So let's go ahead and jump back to the Jupyter notebook
and this is gonna be a bit of a sneak peek
at introducing generators.
Let's go ahead and jump to a quick brief presentation
on what is actually going on here.
Okay, so we're at the presentation
and we're just gonna go over a brief explanation
of ranges, range and xrange
and Python 2 versus Python 3
and how to deal with these functions.
So you might have been wondering;
what happens if I wanna do a huge range of numbers
so if I said range from 0 to one billion;
can your computer store that all in memory?
And that's a great question
so you can imagine if we had put range 0, a billion.
Your output is going to have to save every single one
of those numbers in a huge list
but maybe you just wanted to do for loop
for each of these numbers and then and actually need
to save the entire result.
So that's where generators come in
and we'll have an entire section devoted to generators
but right now, I'm just gonna give you kind
of a sneak preview and a quick explanation of what they are.
So you can think of a generator as allowing generation
of these objects
or sometimes called generated objects and they're provided
at that instance but it doesn't store
every instance generated into memory
so if you use the generator,
for creating that...
Basically, the output of numbers,
you wouldn't have to store each single one of those numbers
so for instance if you wanted to get all the numbers
from 0 to a billion, use them once
and then toss them aside,
that's where a generator can come in to play.
You wouldn't have to save those billion numbers in a list.
So, like I was saying, this means the generator
is not gonna create a list to generate,
like range does but instead, provide a one time generation
of all the numbers in that range.
So, specifically for Python 2.
Python 2 has a built-in range generator
and it's called xrange
and it's recommended to use xrange for for loops
in Python 2.
So, in Python 2, the normal range function
it's going to output a list
and it's gonna save all those numbers into memory.
xrange will generate elements
but not save them into memory.
Now, if you're using Python 3,
the normal range is already a generator
and you don't need to worry about using xrange .
You only ever just use range and that's it.
Okay, so let's go ahead and hop back to the code
and see some examples of what I'm trying to explain here.
So, let's go ahead and start off
with a simple for loop example.
So I'm gonna say,
let's go ahead and make a list.
Equal to one, two, three, four, five.
Then I'm gonna say for num in l my list,
go ahead and print
that number, that num.
Okay, perfect.
Now, you remember earlier,
we set x equal to this output
of the range function and we were able to get a list.
So now, let's go ahead and do that.
So instead of the l,
I'm gonna go ahead and say range
from one to...
up to but not including six.
So I'm saying now for num in that range.
Remember that outputs a list,
go ahead and print that num.
Shift+Enter to run that cell and you notice
it gets the exact same result
and let me go ahead and change that slightly
so you can see that it's actually running.
Okay, so change that back to six.
So that's an example of just the regular range function
in Python 2.
Now something to note; is that Python is actually saving
this and creating an entire list with these numbers.
So what if you wanted to do some gigantic range?
You wouldn't wanna run this
because now you're gonna take up a huge amount of memory
with that gigantic list.
So that's where the xrange comes into play.
So if I use xrange
I'm going to generate those numbers
but not actually save them.
So, let's go ahead and see what this looks like.
I'm gonna go xrange from,
let's say the numbers one through 10.
I run this and you'll notice the output is really similar.
It's the same almost.
Just the fact that the range is different.
So let's go ahead and go back to six
and you'll notice, as far as this for loop's concerned,
nothing's really changed
but now let's go ahead and just look at what's going on
if I were to type xrange,
one through six by itself.
Notice, my output is just xrange
and let's go ahead and check the type of that
so I'm gonna say x is equal to the xrange one to six
and if I ask for the type,
you'll notice now, the type is xrange.
It's actually a generator now
and if I were to set
let's say
x2 as range
one to six
and I check the type of x2,
that's actually a list
so the main take away here;
is that for Python 2,
if you're using range
in the fashion if a for loop
and you actually don't need to save that entire list,
go ahead and make sure you use xrange
to not have to waste memory.
For really small...
Let's say like anywhere in the thousands
or tens of thousands; that's not gonna be a big deal.
Especially with how much RAM computers have these days
but it's good practise to use xrange
and to know what's going on when you're reading
someone else's code.
Now, if you're using Python 3,
basically, you don't have to worry about this anymore
and range is xrange.
Okay, so one last thing;
remember x was xrange type
so what will happen if we try to cast this as a list,
using the list function?
Then we have the output
that we would've gotten from range
so we can actually confirm this
by checking that x2 is equal to
this xrange casted into a list.
Okay, so I know this was a little advanced
but don't worry, we're gonna go over iteration
and generation in much more detail
but I just wanted you to be aware
of essentially this Python 3 alert
where there's a difference between range and xrange
in Python 2 but in Python 3,
this range function has become that generator
and it's not gonna save that entire list into memory
and if you wanted to save that entire list into memory,
you'd have to cast it using something
that looks like this list.
Okay, so that's it for range.
Just a quick overview.
If you ever find yourself trying to make a list
of integers in some sort of sequence,
keep in mind range and xrange are good options there
and you'll see them a tonne in your code
and in other people's code.
Alright, that's it for this lesson
and I'll see you at the next lecture.